docs/TROUBLESHOOTING.md, before:

# Troubleshooting Guide

## Common Issues and Solutions

### Podman Database Configuration Mismatch (Ubuntu + Snap VS Code)

**Symptom:**
```
Error: database configuration mismatch: static directory "/path/A" does not match current configuration "/path/B"
```
or
```
Error: database configuration mismatch: graphroot "/path/A" does not match current configuration "/path/B"
```

**Root Cause:**
This error occurs when Podman's stored database paths don't match the current runtime environment, commonly caused by:
- VS Code installed via Snap creating isolated filesystem namespaces
- Podman storing absolute paths in `~/.local/share/containers/storage/libpod/bolt_state.db`
- Home directory path changes or Snap confinement causing stored paths to become invalid
- User account changes or system migrations that altered the home directory structure

**Solutions (in order of preference):**

#### Solution 1: Reset Podman Storage (Destructive but Fast)

⚠️ **WARNING:** This destroys all containers, images, and volumes.

```bash
podman system reset
```

After reset, verify Podman is working:
```bash
podman info | grep -A5 graphRoot
podman run --rm hello-world
```

#### Solution 2: Manual Configuration Fix (Preserves Data)

This approach keeps your existing containers and images.

```bash
# 1. View the current path mismatch
podman info 2>&1 | grep -A10 "mismatch"

# 2. Check current storage configuration
cat ~/.config/containers/storage.conf

# 3. Edit storage config to match runtime paths shown in the error
vim ~/.config/containers/storage.conf

# Update these fields to match the paths shown in the error message:
# [storage]
# driver = "overlay"
# graphroot = "/home/username/.local/share/containers/storage"  # Update this path
# runroot = "/run/user/1000/containers"                          # Update if needed

# 4. Also check and update static_dir if present
# static_dir = "/home/username/.local/share/containers/storage"  # Update this path
```

After editing, verify the fix:
```bash
podman info | grep -A5 graphRoot
podman ps -a  # Should list containers without errors
```

#### Solution 3: Switch VS Code Installation Method (Root Cause Fix)

Replace Snap-based VS Code with the native .deb package to avoid filesystem namespace issues.

```bash
# Remove Snap version
sudo snap remove code

# Install native .deb package from Microsoft repository
wget -qO- https://packages.microsoft.com/keys/microsoft.asc | gpg --dearmor > packages.microsoft.gpg
sudo install -D -o root -g root -m 644 packages.microsoft.gpg /etc/apt/keyrings/packages.microsoft.gpg
echo "deb [arch=amd64,arm64,armhf signed-by=/etc/apt/keyrings/packages.microsoft.gpg] https://packages.microsoft.com/repos/code stable main" | sudo tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/vscode.list
sudo apt update && sudo apt install code

# Clean up
rm -f packages.microsoft.gpg
```

After reinstalling VS Code, test Podman:
```bash
podman info | grep -A5 graphRoot
./RUN_PLAYBOOK.bash  # Test with project
```

#### Solution 4: Alternative - Use Docker Instead

If Podman continues to have issues, the project supports Docker as well:

```bash
# Install Docker (if not already installed)
sudo apt update
sudo apt install docker.io
sudo usermod -aG docker $USER
newgrp docker  # Or log out and back in

# Verify Docker works
docker info
./RUN_PLAYBOOK.bash  # Script auto-detects Docker
```

**Verification Steps:**

After applying any solution:

```bash
# 1. Check Podman configuration is consistent
podman info | grep -E "(graphRoot|runRoot|static)"

# 2. Test basic container operations
podman run --rm alpine:latest echo "Podman is working"

# 3. Run the project's container workflow
./RUN_PLAYBOOK.bash

# 4. Verify container networking
podman ps -a
```

**Prevention Tips:**

- **Use native package managers** (apt, dnf) over Snap for development tools
- **Avoid changing home directory paths** after Podman initialization
- **Document your VS Code installation method** in team onboarding
- **Consider adding `podman system reset`** to onboarding docs if team uses mixed installations
- **Regular backups**: Export important containers with `podman save` before major system changes

**Related Issues:**

- If you see "permission denied" errors after switching VS Code installations, check directory ownership:
  ```bash
  ls -la ~/.local/share/containers/
  # Should be owned by your user, not root
  ```

- If containers exist but are inaccessible, check the database directly:
  ```bash
  file ~/.local/share/containers/storage/libpod/bolt_state.db
  # Should be a Berkeley DB file
  ```

### `molecule verify` fails with argparse.ArgumentError

**Error Message:**
```
argparse.ArgumentError: argument --inventory/--ansible-inventory: conflicting option string: --ansible-inventory
ERROR    Verifier tests failed
```

**Cause:**
The `pytest-ansible` and `pytest-testinfra` plugins both register the same command-line argument (`--inventory` / `--ansible-inventory`), causing a conflict during pytest initialization. This affects Python 3.12+ due to stricter argparse validation.

**Solution:**
The activation script (`ACTIVATE_SANDBOX_ENV.bash`) automatically uninstalls `pytest-ansible` after installing dependencies. This is the recommended approach since:
- We only need `pytest-testinfra` for Molecule verify steps
- The `pytest-ansible` plugin is not used in our test scenarios
- Removing it has no impact on other Ansible functionality

**Manual Fix:**
If you encounter this error:
```bash
pip uninstall -y pytest-ansible
```

**Prevention:**
Always use `source ACTIVATE_SANDBOX_ENV.bash` to set up your environment. The script handles this automatically.

### Python Version Issues

**Issue:** Virtual environment created with Python 3.13 or higher

**Solution:**
The project supports Python >3.9 and <3.15 due to historical pytest plugin conflicts mitigated by our environment setup. The activation script automatically selects the newest compatible version available on your system. If you need to recreate your environment:

```bash
deactivate
rm -rf .venv
source ACTIVATE_SANDBOX_ENV.bash
```

The script will automatically choose the best available Python version (typically 3.10–3.14).

### Container Port Conflicts

**Error:** Port 2222 already in use when running `RUN_PLAYBOOK.bash`

**Solution:**
Edit `RUN_PLAYBOOK.bash` and modify the `CONTAINER_HOST_PORT` variable to use a different port:

```bash
CONTAINER_HOST_PORT=2223  # or any available port
```

### Molecule Config Warnings

**Warning:**
```
WARNING  default ➜ config: The scenario config file has been modified since the scenario was created
```

**Solution:**
This warning appears when the molecule.yml file changes after creating a scenario. To clear it:

```bash
molecule destroy -s default  # Clean up scenario
# or
molecule reset -s default    # Reset configuration without destroying instances
```

### Vault Decryption Failures

**Issue:** Cannot decrypt vaulted variables

**Checklist:**
1. Verify vault password file exists: `ls -la vault-pw.txt`
2. Check vault-id matches in the vaulted block (e.g., `vault_id: !vault |`)
3. Ensure `ANSIBLE_VAULT_PASSWORD_FILE` is set (automatically done by activation script)
4. Use the decrypt utility: `python DECRYPT_VAULTED_ITEMS.py --file vars/file.yml --vault-id dev`

### Missing Collections

**Error:** Collection not found during playbook execution

**Solution:**
Install required collections:
```bash
ansible-galaxy collection install -r requirements.txt  # If collections are in requirements.txt
# or
ansible-galaxy collection install ansible.posix community.general
```

These are automatically installed by `RUN_PLAYBOOK.bash` but may be needed for manual playbook runs.

### Role Not Found

**Error:** Role 'ans_dev_sandbox_role' not found

**Solution:**
Install the external role:
```bash
ansible-galaxy install -r roles/requirements.yml --roles-path roles
```

During development, if you have the role locally, create a symlink:
```bash
ln -snf ../ans_dev_sandbox_role roles/ans_dev_sandbox_role
```

## Getting Help

If you encounter an issue not covered here:

1. Check that your environment is activated: `source ACTIVATE_SANDBOX_ENV.bash`
2. Verify Python version: `python --version` (should be within >3.9 and <3.15)
3. Check for conflicting packages: `pip list | grep pytest`
4. Review logs: `cat ansible.log`
5. Run with verbose output: `molecule --debug verify -s default`

For plugin conflicts or package issues, recreate the virtual environment as described above.

Commit message:

change from shell to python for activate and run scripts

docs/TROUBLESHOOTING.md, after:

# Troubleshooting Guide

## Common Issues and Solutions

### Podman Database Configuration Mismatch (Ubuntu + Snap VS Code)

**Symptom:**
```
Error: database configuration mismatch: static directory "/path/A" does not match current configuration "/path/B"
```
or
```
Error: database configuration mismatch: graphroot "/path/A" does not match current configuration "/path/B"
```

**Root Cause:**
This error occurs when Podman's stored database paths don't match the current runtime environment, commonly caused by:
- VS Code installed via Snap creating isolated filesystem namespaces
- Podman storing absolute paths in `~/.local/share/containers/storage/libpod/bolt_state.db`
- Home directory path changes or Snap confinement causing stored paths to become invalid
- User account changes or system migrations that altered the home directory structure

**Solutions (in order of preference):**

#### Solution 1: Reset Podman Storage (Destructive but Fast)

⚠️ **WARNING:** This destroys all containers, images, and volumes.

```bash
podman system reset
```

After reset, verify Podman is working:
```bash
podman info | grep -A5 graphRoot
podman run --rm hello-world
```

#### Solution 2: Manual Configuration Fix (Preserves Data)

This approach keeps your existing containers and images.

```bash
# 1. View the current path mismatch
podman info 2>&1 | grep -A10 "mismatch"

# 2. Check current storage configuration
cat ~/.config/containers/storage.conf

# 3. Edit storage config to match runtime paths shown in the error
vim ~/.config/containers/storage.conf

# Update these fields to match the paths shown in the error message:
# [storage]
# driver = "overlay"
# graphroot = "/home/username/.local/share/containers/storage"  # Update this path
# runroot = "/run/user/1000/containers"                          # Update if needed

# 4. Also check and update static_dir if present
# static_dir = "/home/username/.local/share/containers/storage"  # Update this path
```

After editing, verify the fix:
```bash
podman info | grep -A5 graphRoot
podman ps -a  # Should list containers without errors
```

#### Solution 3: Switch VS Code Installation Method (Root Cause Fix)

Replace Snap-based VS Code with the native .deb package to avoid filesystem namespace issues.

```bash
# Remove Snap version
sudo snap remove code

# Install native .deb package from Microsoft repository
wget -qO- https://packages.microsoft.com/keys/microsoft.asc | gpg --dearmor > packages.microsoft.gpg
sudo install -D -o root -g root -m 644 packages.microsoft.gpg /etc/apt/keyrings/packages.microsoft.gpg
echo "deb [arch=amd64,arm64,armhf signed-by=/etc/apt/keyrings/packages.microsoft.gpg] https://packages.microsoft.com/repos/code stable main" | sudo tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/vscode.list
sudo apt update && sudo apt install code

# Clean up
rm -f packages.microsoft.gpg
```

After reinstalling VS Code, test Podman:
```bash
podman info | grep -A5 graphRoot
python sandbox.py run  # Test with project
```

#### Solution 4: Alternative - Use Docker Instead

If Podman continues to have issues, the project supports Docker as well:

```bash
# Install Docker (if not already installed)
sudo apt update
sudo apt install docker.io
sudo usermod -aG docker $USER
newgrp docker  # Or log out and back in

# Verify Docker works
docker info
python sandbox.py run  # CLI auto-detects Docker
```

**Verification Steps:**

After applying any solution:

```bash
# 1. Check Podman configuration is consistent
podman info | grep -E "(graphRoot|runRoot|static)"

# 2. Test basic container operations
podman run --rm alpine:latest echo "Podman is working"

# 3. Run the project's container workflow
python sandbox.py run

# 4. Verify container networking
podman ps -a
```

**Prevention Tips:**

- **Use native package managers** (apt, dnf) over Snap for development tools
- **Avoid changing home directory paths** after Podman initialization
- **Document your VS Code installation method** in team onboarding
- **Consider adding `podman system reset`** to onboarding docs if team uses mixed installations
- **Regular backups**: Export important containers with `podman save` before major system changes

**Related Issues:**

- If you see "permission denied" errors after switching VS Code installations, check directory ownership:
  ```bash
  ls -la ~/.local/share/containers/
  # Should be owned by your user, not root
  ```

- If containers exist but are inaccessible, check the database directly:
  ```bash
  file ~/.local/share/containers/storage/libpod/bolt_state.db
  # Should be a Berkeley DB file
  ```

### `molecule verify` fails with argparse.ArgumentError

**Error Message:**
```
argparse.ArgumentError: argument --inventory/--ansible-inventory: conflicting option string: --ansible-inventory
ERROR    Verifier tests failed
```

**Cause:**
The `pytest-ansible` and `pytest-testinfra` plugins both register the same command-line argument (`--inventory` / `--ansible-inventory`), causing a conflict during pytest initialization. This affects Python 3.12+ due to stricter argparse validation.

**Solution:**
`python sandbox.py activate` installs dependencies and then removes `pytest-ansible` to prevent this clash because:
- We only need `pytest-testinfra` for Molecule verify steps
- The `pytest-ansible` plugin is not used in our test scenarios
- Removing it has no impact on other Ansible functionality

**Manual Fix:**
If you encounter this error:
```bash
pip uninstall -y pytest-ansible
```

**Prevention:**
Run `python sandbox.py activate` (and `source .venv/bin/activate` when needed) before Molecule or pytest.

### Python Version Issues

**Issue:** Virtual environment created with Python 3.13 or higher

**Solution:**
The project supports Python >3.9 and <3.15 due to historical pytest plugin conflicts mitigated by our environment setup. `python sandbox.py activate` automatically selects the newest compatible version available on your system. If you need to recreate your environment:

```bash
deactivate
rm -rf .venv
python sandbox.py activate
source .venv/bin/activate
```

The CLI will automatically choose the best available Python version (typically 3.10–3.14).

### Container Port Conflicts

**Error:** Port 2222 already in use when running `python sandbox.py run`

**Solution:**
Override the port when running or adjust `.env`:

```bash
python sandbox.py run --container-host-port 2223  # or any available port
# or edit CONTAINER_HOST_PORT in .env then rerun
```

### Molecule Config Warnings

**Warning:**
```
WARNING  default ➜ config: The scenario config file has been modified since the scenario was created
```

**Solution:**
This warning appears when the molecule.yml file changes after creating a scenario. To clear it:

```bash
molecule destroy -s default  # Clean up scenario
# or
molecule reset -s default    # Reset configuration without destroying instances
```

### Vault Decryption Failures

**Issue:** Cannot decrypt vaulted variables

**Checklist:**
1. Verify vault password file exists: `ls -la vault-pw.txt`
2. Check vault-id matches in the vaulted block (e.g., `vault_id: !vault |`)
3. Ensure `ANSIBLE_VAULT_PASSWORD_FILE` is set (automatically done by activation script)
4. Use the decrypt utility: `python DECRYPT_VAULTED_ITEMS.py --file vars/file.yml --vault-id dev`

### Missing Collections

**Error:** Collection not found during playbook execution

**Solution:**
Install required collections:
```bash
ansible-galaxy collection install -r requirements.txt  # If collections are in requirements.txt
# or
ansible-galaxy collection install ansible.posix community.general
```

These are automatically installed by `python sandbox.py run` but may be needed for manual playbook runs.

### Role Not Found

**Error:** Role 'ans_dev_sandbox_role' not found

**Solution:**
Install the external role:
```bash
ansible-galaxy install -r roles/requirements.yml --roles-path roles
```

During development, if you have the role locally, create a symlink:
```bash
ln -snf ../ans_dev_sandbox_role roles/ans_dev_sandbox_role
```

## Getting Help

If you encounter an issue not covered here:

1. Check that your environment is activated: `python sandbox.py activate` then `source .venv/bin/activate`
2. Verify Python version: `python --version` (should be within >3.9 and <3.15)
3. Check for conflicting packages: `pip list | grep pytest`
4. Review logs: `cat ansible.log`
5. Run with verbose output: `molecule --debug verify -s default`

For plugin conflicts or package issues, recreate the virtual environment as described above.
